

The real game starts with a cutscene where we get to see Maeve's brave decision to quit her job and strike out on your own. (The developer has, in fact, confirmed that this scene was partially inspired by his own career trajectory.) With Roland's help, she mines the ARC data files for information about defunct mining claims that are up for sale. Her grandfather, who also worked in the mining industry, dropped some extremely vague hints about a valuable, hidden claim called "Kappa"... or something like that.

Together they track down something that seems like it could be the right place. Blowing her life savings on the rights to the claim, transportation to get there, and some basic starting supplies, our intrepid duo is off on the adventure of their lives... or at least the next 30–60 hours of playtime for you and me.

That drops you into the game at one end of a long canyon. The big open field in which you're going to build your brand new outpost home is at the far end of said canyon, but there's a few more tutorials to do between here and there.

When you reach the overlook of the big clearing, turn right and head off to the NE and down a bit until you get some dialogue about food. One thing to take note of right away: you now have vital stats gauges for **stamina**, **nutrition**, and **hydration**. They should be somewhere around the midpoint at the moment, but they fall pretty quickly and you'll want to keep an eye on them.

This is a good time to mention the Settings page. There are several options there that allow you to adjust how "hardcore" your play experience will be. You can adjust these settings at any time with no penalty, so check them out and see what they offer and if something feels too easy or too hard, try adjusting a setting. (More on this in the [Basic TIps](#basic-tips) section.)

Anyway, Maeve is feeling hungry, so hover over the cacti that dot the path you're following and see what they produce when you laser them. The tall, straight ones tend to only produce [Biomass](), but the short, squat ones with flowers will also produce [Cactus Fruit](). This is your first and only source of food for a little while, so start harvesting every cactus you can find that produces fruit. Eat one or two of those — open your inventory with `tab`, then use the middle mouse button to "use" the fruit to eat it — and watch your vital signs go up.

You may also notice some [status indicators](#status-indicators) over the lower-center part of the HUD. If you keep your vitals up over 45%, you'll actually get bonuses to things like oxygen capacity, movement speed, and weight limit. This is how the game encourages you to keep yourself properly fed and watered.

Proceed a little further and there's a slightly-too-high drop that you can't jump back up onto. (That's okay; you don't ever need to.) Go ahead and collect some more cactus fruit, and while you're at it, practice by chopping down a Palm Tree or two. Palm trees tend to fall into a big clump of stuff; sometimes if you wade through it and kick the larger bits out of the way, there are collectables hiding underneath. You may also notice that you pick up a few [Sandstone Shards]() or [Regolith Chunks]() along the way; you can acquire these just by lasering the ground, but there are naturally better sources of raw material.

Take note of the steps up to the cave entrance just to the NNE of you, but Roland will rightly steer you away from it for now. Just past that the canyon will open up onto the plain where we'll start building your Outpost. Two things happen here: you get your first personal log and your first plot mission, which is to collect [Scrap]() so you can start building things. Personal logs act as sort of plot milestones, so I'll call them out throughout the guide like this:

> #1 — An Inauspicious Start

Let's get the lay of the land. You should see a handful of new things you can zap lying about: medium-sized railings and piles of metal, the Palm Trees and Cacti you've already seen, plus Regolith Spires that you can shoot for raw materials. (Don't do that yet.) There's also something called a Small Outcrop, which if you hover over it, reveals that it can be blown up with a Small [Terraforming Charge](). That sounds like fun! For now, though, take Roland's advice and start lasering all the random scrap metal you find. That converts it into [Metal Scrap]() that you can pick up.

This part of the game can be a bit frustrating. It's not super clear which bits of the discarded railings and whatnot actually need to be shot in order to reveal collectable items. You can usually only get two or three pieces of scrap out of each railing, and you'll wind up shooting pieces that don't turn into scrap. This becomes much less of an issue once you start doing the actual mining work, but for now you just have to try it and see. I had luck focusing on the "corners" instead of the middle parts.

Also note that Roland's mining laser has a battery. The targeting circle turns red when he's almost out of power, and when you stop shooting it slowly refills. Later on we'll buy some upgrades that will increase the power, capacity, and recharge rate of the mining laser.

One final tip here: don't laser anything you aren't planning to pick up right away. Anything you leave lying around has a chance of disappearing, eventually. Anything that disappears *quickly* (i.e. within a few seconds of shooting it) probably wasn't anything you could collect in the first place, but if you want it you'd better pick it up. Incidentally, you can *drop* things from your inventory — hover over the stack and hit `ESC` — which will produce a small cache on the ground. I still don't know if those caches disappear on their own, but I haven't seen it happen yet.

Once you've picked up five or ten pieces of scrap, hit `B` to open the Build Menu and take a look at the various options there. I love the fact that you can collect [Biomass]() and [Regolith]() and then do some artificial landscaping through the "Nature" submenu, but for now the thing you need to do is pick "Facilities" and build yourself a [Makeshift Forge](). As soon as you do that, Roland hands you the blueprint for a [Makeshift Habitat]() and encourages you to build one ASAP. Don't forget to hit `B` again (or use the right mouse button) to exit Build Mode.

This being your first **production facility**, let's cover a few basics. To use the Forge, get close to it and then click on it. You'll see it has an "inventory" window, which is where you'll put raw materials and collect processed output. You can also see all the "recipes" that it knows how to make, including a list of what materials you need to put in (and in what quantities) to produce which outputs. Here's a few notes about using production facilities:

- Production facilities run automatically as soon as you feed them raw materials, presuming that there are any active recipes (see below) and there's enough raw materials to run them. Left click to transfer one object at a time, shift-left click to transfer half of a stack, or right click to transfer an entire stack. These commands work in both directions.
- Production facilities have infinite storage capacity. You can dump as much raw material as you want into one and you're under no obligation to remove any outputs. However, items in facility storage can't be used anywhere else; you will, eventually, need to move them into your inventory and/or a storage unit first. (You *cannot* put output materials back into a facility once you've removed them.)
- Recipes can be enabled and disabled. If they're disabled, you can still (manually) dump raw materials into the facility's storage, but the facility won't run disabled recipes. Recipes are run from top to bottom; the first recipe with the right raw materials in the hopper is what will run.
- If you combine those two tips, you can (for example) use a Makeshift Forge as an infinite-capacity storage unit for Biomass. More useful storage is pretty cheap, though.
- The hotkey `F` will automatically transfer all usable raw materials from your inventory into facility storage. Inputs for disabled recipes are ignored. **FIXME:** shift-F, ctrl-F
- Production facilities learn how to make new things by acquiring **blueprints**. Some blueprints can be found during your explorations, some are granted by the game when you advance the story or find a new raw material, and some are purchased at the [Trade Node](). I'll try to point out when this happens, but keep an eye on the [Crafting](/aethus/crafting) page for hints about what's coming in the future.

Take as much time as you like clearing [Metal Scrap]() from this area (you'll want most of it gone, eventually) and collecting [Cactus Fruit]() and [Biomass](). Don't wander too far, though, lest you confuse the order of events the game wants you to take. Dump the Scrap into the Forge and smelt some [Building Materials](). These are the basic, abstract material that will make up the foundation of your one-man mining village and get you through the first chunk of the game.

Take the Materials out of the Forge's hopper and stick them in your inventory, then open Build Mode and build yourself a [Makeshift Habitat]() (under "Structures"). Play around with the build system for a few minutes; note that you can click on an existing object, which then gives you the option to move (`M`) it somewhere else, produce a duplicate (`U`) version — very useful for storage crates — or dismantle (`N`) it, which removes it from the world and refunds 100% of the construction cost to you. Later on you'll be able to apply color themes (`T`) to habitats and other constructions as well.

Note that if you Dismantle a facility (or storage unit) that has materials in its hopper, the game will also try to move those items into your inventory but will most likely end up leaving a small cache nearby with the overflow.

Building your first Habitat alsoompts the game to give you the blueprint for your first item of furniture: a [Bed](). Build one of those, and you've got the extremely humble beginnings of an outpost to call your very own. You're also promptly granted several more blueprints, including a [Scrap Grill]() (under "Facilities") and a [Makeshift Crate]() (under "Storage", a new category). Go ahead and make one of each of those right now, or farm some more scrap metal first if you need to.

We did get to play with storage units a little bit during the Prologue, but for now, pick up some [Biomass](), [Metal Scrap](), and [Building Material]() from the Forge and dump them all into the crate you just build. Isn't it nice to get some inventory room back?

Next we'll learn how to use the crafting interface. The Grill is a **crafting facility**; similar to processing facilities, they have a list of recipes that transform raw materials into output items, they have infinite storage, and they learn how to make new things via the acquisition of blueprints. (Like the recipe for [Grilled Cactus Fruit]() that the game just granted you.) Unlike processing facilities, crafting facilities have no input hopper for raw materials, and they won't make anything until you explicitly tell them to do so.

Crafting facilities pull their inputs either from your inventory or, cleverly, from any storage unit in your outpost no matter how far away it is. Unlike processing facilities, which demand that you hand-feed them their input, you can walk up to a crafting facility empty-handed and say "Somewhere in my storage units there is some Biomass and some Cactus Fruits; make me a Grilled Cactus Fruit" and it'll just do it. Give it a try.

On the other hand, just like processing facilities, the output hopper of a crafting facility does *not* behave this way; things must be pulled into your inventory before they can be used as input. You will often find yourself in a situation where you're using a crafting facility and one of the ingredients is in the output hopper *of that same facility*, and the game will tell you it can't make the thing. You just have to pick the things up first. It's dumb.

Crafting facilities also have a "queue", so you can line up several production runs and then walk away. The queue tops out at ten items (plus whatever's actively being crafted), so go ahead and click "Add to Queue" a bunch of times, and when you come back you'll have a bunch of [Grilled Cactus Fruit]() to eat. Ahh, that's better. Go ahead and fill up on this stuff; note that grilled fruit is slightly more nutritious than raw. As before, you can hover over the item's icon to see its specific effects, or check the [Items](/aethus/items) page for spoilers.

